[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> We live in a fantastic
world where curiosity
and perseverance are rewarded
with knowledge and wisdom.
And for millennia,
humanity has attempted
to correctly
identify and describe
the true nature of reality.
One theory currently competing
for preeminence in this quest
is the plasma universe model.
Plasma universe theory is
an alternative cosmology
which posits that the
dynamics of plasmas
play an important,
if not dominant, role
in the fundamental physics
of the universe, which
may be eternal and infinite,
directly contradicting the Big
Bang model.
Does plasma play a
more significant role
than is generally accepted?
And if so, will that lead
to a unique understanding
of ourselves and our
place in the universe?
>> We're aware of solid matter.
We're aware of liquids.
We're aware of gases.
But plasma is beyond that.
Plasma is the fourth
state of matter.
And essentially what it
is is if you take a gas
and fracture it through
heat, it breaks up
the atoms that form the gas.
And when this happens,
the electrons break free.
And when they break
free, they start getting
excited and they emit photons.
These are small
particles of light
which illuminate everything.
And as this happens,
more and more electrons
break free of the atoms,
bump into each other,
create almost like
a chain reaction.
And as this occurs, they produce
their own magnetic fields.
So in other words, they're
getting bigger and bigger,
these seas of electrons, until
eventually you can actually see
plasma as like a bowl of light.
>> The Northern Lights are a
really good example of this
solar energy, this energy
coming in from our sun,
which comes as these
bursts of plasma energy.
And as that energy
from our sun comes in,
and it hits the magnetic
field of the earth,
it spirals it down through
those magnetic lines.
And it shows up as these
beautiful lights and colors
as different photons come
off from that spiraling
motion of that plasma coming
in around the magnetic field
lines.
>> In the plasma universe, deep
space is permeated with giant
filaments of electrons and ions.
These filaments twist
together in space
due to electromagnetic forces.
And some of their vast energy
is then converted into matter.
And new galaxies are
the eventual result.
The intricate spiral
arms of galaxies
are said to reveal further
interactions of the plasma
filaments.
>> The universe,
we could say, is,
for all intents and
purposes, plasma.
So plasma is a very
interesting state of matter.
So basically we first realized
matter clearly can be solid
and then clearly can be liquid.
These are two different
phases of matter.
And then it can be a gas.
Later we discovered,
OK, it can be a gas.
And then those are
third state of matter.
And then eventually,
we realize when
there's enough
energy in a gas, it
becomes a different
state of matter
that we call plasma,
which is a gas that
has a lot of electrons in it.
And that's very energized.
And when it's in that
state, it behaves
a little bit like a gas,
a little bit like a fluid,
and a little bit like a solid.
It has all these
different elements in it.
So it's its own state.
But in fact, the universe is
made out of 99.999% plasma.
And the rest, that's
not plasma, is basically
plasma that's cooled off.
And that's made things
that are more like what we
call solids, fluids, and gases.
What we're discovering is
that plasma has all kinds
of self-organizing behaviors.
It suggests that there is
a information flow that's
going through the system
so that the system will
tend to certain
organizing principle.
For instance, we're discovering
that vortices in the plasma
can organize to make very
specific crystalline geometry.
And so that plasma can
self-organize and create
very specific dynamics.
>> Self-organization is
an example of the concept
of emergence, which occurs when
an entity is observed to have
properties its parts do
not have on their own,
properties or behaviors which
emerge only when the parts
interact.
Self-organization occurs in many
physical, chemical, biological,
robotic, and cognitive systems.
It is often triggered by
seemingly random fluctuations
which can be conceptualized
as islands of predictability
in a sea of chaotic
unpredictability.
>> I love these images from the
Hubble telescope that show us
how there's all this plasma
and energy connecting from
different nebulae to galaxies
and super clusters of galaxies.
And as you scan back and see
the whole infrastructure,
that whole network, it
is like an organism.
And it's all connected
throughout the universe.
And the more we look at
those images from Hubble,
it shows us how
the similar images
that we see of
that infrastructure
resembles the
neurons in our brain.
It resembles the circulatory
system and the blood flow
system, and all of this.
And the plasma that
flows through our veins,
there's plasma flowing
through the universe.
So it is, again, we
are the reflection
of the whole macrocosm in us.
And maybe it's the
other way around.
Maybe the macrocosm is a
reflection of our form.
>> This state of energy, you got
to ask where is it coming from?
It's one thing to say, oh, it
all came out of a Big Bang.
Well the Big Bang
was in a little point
of the Planck scale, right?
You got to ask,
well, is there more
of this energy in the
Planck scale everywhere?
And that's what
we're discovering
is that actually the plasma
we see in the universe
is actually coming from
a deeper level or a finer
level of plasma that we could
call the Planck plasma, which
is Planck particles
oscillating like a plasma
but billions of times
smaller than the atom.
Meaning that that grain
resolution of the plasma,
the grain frequency of
the plasma, is so small
and the frequency so high
we can't tell it's there.
We're discovering it now.
And it's really a Planck
plasma at the base
of the structure of space from
which the more gross plasma,
the more larger
grained plasma that
are made of protons, and
electrons, and all this,
emerged from to
produce our universe.
>> While debate on the validity
and significance of the plasma
universe theory continues, some
scientists like physicists Wal
Thornhill have developed
distinct but complementary
theories which share some
similarities with plasma
universe concepts.
Based on observation
and experiment,
the electric universe
model unifies
the nuclear forces,
magnetism and gravity,
as manifestations of
an electric force.
>> The standard model of
cosmology is based on the idea
that gravity is the controlling
force in the universe.
The electric universe
takes a different view.
And that is it is the electric
force and the electric force
alone which governs not only the
universe, but also everything
within it, including us.
The electric universe
has a different picture
of the connection
between all things,
both at the biological
level right down
to the subatomic,
which is not recognized
by present-day science.
>> So the electric
universe theory,
take for account the electric
nature of plasma interaction
in our universe.
For instance, we
know that there is
very strong electric
filaments that
connect the earth and the
sun that are constantly
transferring gigawatts of power
in between planets and stars.
And this electrical nature
of the plasma dynamics
and the plasma interaction
between systems in our universe
is typically ignored
by current cosmology.
So the electric
universe cosmology
brings this forward as something
fundamental and important
in understanding the dynamics
of our universe and our world.
In itself as well have
the possibility to birth
a whole new level
of technology where
we're extracting energy
or electricity literally
from our universe.
And so it has very important
consequences for humanity.
>> Most people think of
electricity as flowing through
wires into appliances
and powering motors,
lighting the home.
In fact, it's used for almost
everything in our daily lives.
But lightning is also a form
of electric current in plasma.
And that type of behavior, of
lightning, is the kind of thing
that we see in space.
That is a form of plasma which
occurs in a more dense medium.
What happens is that the
energy in that lightning bolt
is sufficient to strip the
electrons off neutral atoms
so that they separate
positive and negative charge.
Once you do that,
you have a plasma.
In space when the
space age began
it was discovered that
space is full of plasma.
Somehow or another,
the universe is
full of particles
which have been
separated from their partners.
The electrons and the
protons have separated.
Those particles are
now being charged
subject to the action
of magnetic fields.
And that means
that their behavior
is quite different to
that flowing in a wire.
>> Lightning is one of the
most dramatic manifestations
of plasma.
Due to its free
electrons, plasma
is a good conductor of
electricity, much better
than copper, silver, or gold.
As a thunderstorm
develops, negative charges
accumulate along the cloud
base causing positive charges
to build up on the ground below.
The resulting electrical field
between the two concentrations
becomes so strong that
it ionizers the air.
This creates a conducting path
of free electrons and ions,
a plasma through which
the lightning discharges.
Fortunately for human beings
and other living things,
plasmas are not
routinely encountered
on the surface of the earth.
However, we do see
natural plasmas
in the form of
lightning, and auroras,
and man-made ones most
commonly in the form
of fluorescent light bulbs.
Farther from the surface,
the earth's magnetosphere
contains plasma, which
is populated by particles
of the solar wind interacting
with ones from the earth's
upper atmosphere.
If we look at these
systems on a smaller scale,
does plasma manifest in
other forms, perhaps even
as sentient life and impact
our reality in other ways?
>> Some people have had these
encounters with these beings
who maybe they look like-- some
people describe it as a light
being.
Maybe they think,
oh, it's an angel.
Some people think, oh no, this
is an extraterrestrial, right?
There's these beings who can
manifest and materialize to us.
And they will work with
these higher frequency
forms of matter, whether it's
light or plasma or just air
molecules.
And through their
consciousness, they
will form and shape these
interfaces to this density
so that we can
perceive them in a way
that our senses can detect.
>> I think that all of this
is a product of the communion,
the relationship, between
us and this phenomena.
But it's not simply some
kind of slave-like reaction
to our thoughts.
I think that the intelligences
deliberately choose the form
that they want us to see them.
And it's reflective
upon our beliefs.
It's reflective upon
our religious ideas,
our cultural beliefs,
and whatever is going on
at that exact moment.
I mean if we're in
great fear, the chances
are we would see a
demon or a devil.
And in the past,
this is exactly what
happened because people would
see these lights in the past
and they would suddenly
find themselves encountering
fairies, and goblins, and
devils, and things like this.
Clearly we've
updated this today.
We expect to see
extraterrestrials.
We expect to see aliens.
And in many cases,
that's what we get.
So does that mean that there
are no aliens out there?
Of course not.
We know that there are countless
billions of stars out there
and many of those have life.
And some of that life may
be incredibly intelligent,
developed
civilizations and could
be millions, if not
billions of years
older than that of our own.
>> I think it is totally
possible that there are
intelligent entities that
are comprised of plasma.
But the reason why
that would be the case
is because they are somehow
super advanced holograms.
And I'm not saying that that
means that they're not real
or just man-made
or something, I'm
just saying that like if
they are made of plasma,
it's almost definitely
because they're
part of some sort
of projection rather
than it's some sort of physical
biological substrate of theirs.
>> Is it possible that sentient
life can exist within plasma?
Plasma itself is simply
a state of matter.
On its own, it's
not intelligent.
However, various
scientific papers
have been written to
suggest that it exists
within a four-dimensional state
or perhaps even higher, five,
11, 22.
Who knows how many
dimensions might be involved?
But because it is
multidimensional in nature,
it allows consciousness
that exists
on a multidimensional level to
enter inside and animate it.
It can almost be
described as like a glove
you would wear on your
hand, for instance.
Before you put it
on, it is simply
a piece of linen,
or perhaps leather,
or some other material
that is laying on a table.
But when you put
your hand inside it
and start moving it around,
it animates the glove.
It's as if the glove
has come alive.
>> In 1923, a young engineer
named Irving Langmuir,
who would go on to win the
Nobel Prize in chemistry,
gave plasma its name.
He borrowed the term
plasma from medicine,
because it exhibited the same
unstable, almost lifelike
behavior of the ionized material
with which he experimented.
>> As far back as the 1960s, the
quantum physicist, David Bohm--
who was working with plasma,
he was observing it and trying
to understand its process--
began to realize that the way
that it moved, the way that it
acted, was very
similar to the way
that the cells in a biological
system actually worked.
And he began to conceive
of the possibility
that it might actually be alive.
And the plasma itself
is simply electrons.
So that's not the life itself.
But what he came
to the conclusion
was that once I see
if plasma existed,
that it formed a
multidimensional doorway
into a deeper
level of existence.
And that this
allowed intelligences
that existed within
this realm to manifest
into our own physical world.
And if this is the
case, then what
is the relationship between
us as biological life
and these plasma intelligences?
Is it possible that
we also are animated
by some kind of
primary source that
coexists with our bodily
structure, with our blood,
with our flesh and animates us?
And the key is entanglement,
quantum entanglement.
The psychic connection between
us and the phenomenon itself.
And is it possible
that this consciousness
is the root behind the
concept of the soul or spirit?
>> Entanglement is the
idea that particles,
when they're
created, have twins.
And that these twins,
no matter how far away
they get from each other, have
an instantaneous connection
that is retained forever.
>> If you can
imagine, therefore,
every particle has its twin
and this dual relationship
instantaneously, then it becomes
a likely theory for everything
from telepathy to mind over
matter and even precognition,
because quantum entanglement
exists outside of normal
space-time.
So it's not just happening
in the here and the now,
it can happen within the past,
the present, and the future
all at once.
>> When we interact
with this phenomena,
is it possible that some of the
particles within these plasma
intelligences are resonating
with their own twin particles
within us?
>> This resonance, this harmony,
this communication between us
and the phenomenon itself,
it's a psychic experience.
It's one that we share with it.
It's a communion, if you like.
And through this, knowledge
and information can be passed.
And it is my sense
that this is something
that's been going on for
not just thousands of years
but arguably for
millions of years.
Since humanity first
entered onto this planet,
we've had a relationship with
these plasma intelligences.
And it could well
be that they have
been guiding evolution itself.
And if we now switch
to the idea of UFOs
and the observation
of mysterious lights,
very often they are said
to be sentient in nature,
that they appear to be alive.
>> In May 2006, the UK
Ministry of Defence released
a previously classified,
top secret report code-named
the Condign Project.
The 465-page report
was a compilation
of UAP investigations conducted
from 1997 through 2000.
The document concludes that
the most compelling UAP
reports were caused by plasmas.
The report states,
"The phenomena
can create radiation
burn marks on witnesses
who get too close to the
strong electromagnetic fields
associated with the plasmas,
cause ground traces,
and produce a myriad of
other strange effects."
The report goes on
to say that plasmas
can take the shape of saucers.
They can have what appear to be
searchlights beamed from them.
They're able to move
at astonishing speeds
and can interact with observers.
>> Are UFOs plasma
intelligences, plasma beings?
And the answer to that, I
believe, is absolutely yes.
Why do I believe this?
Because many years ago, I came
into the field of UFO research
believing that flying
saucers, UFOs, were
nuts and bolts spacecraft.
But what I found is that
many of the sincere witnesses
were also having psychic
experiences in connection
with their sightings
and encounters.
And I wondered how
this was possible.
Because if you see an aircraft
going over in the sky,
you don't have any psychic
connection with it.
So why would you have
a psychic connection
with a nuts and bolts spacecraft
going through the heavens?
And the answer is,
of course, you're
not dealing with nuts
and bolts, in my opinion.
I think that many UFOs, not
necessarily all of them,
are actually
manifestations of plasma.
And plasma can come in
various different ways.
It is not simply a small ball
of light, but it can be huge.
It can be tens of feet across,
perhaps even larger than that.
It can be solid.
It can be cold to the touch.
It can be hot to the touch.
It can come in the form
of strange mists and fogs
that appear to be on fire.
>> Just because it doesn't have
a carbon-based form of body
like we do doesn't mean that
it's not just as intelligent
and just as evolved or on a
process of evolution like we
are.
And in fact, some of them may
be even more evolved and more
intelligent than we are.
But I don't want to
diminish human either.
But to me, a human is not
this body and this DNA form,
to me, human is our spirit.
It is our eternal being.
And it comes from
so much farther
than what we experience here
in our physical reality.
But as we start to, again,
broaden our definition
of what is life, what is
sentient, what is conscious,
what is evolved, we
can start getting
beyond our very limited box
of human social thinking
and start really
perceiving the bigger
universe that is incredible.
>> If plasma does play
a fundamental role
in the structure and
function of our universe,
as well as our interaction
and engagement with it,
what might the implications
be for humanity if we accept
and integrate these concepts?
>> For the plasma universe
theory to have a deep meaning
in the evolution
of our world today,
it needs to be formalized
in a deeper level.
It needs to be
formalized in parallel
with a unified view of physics.
>> If the plasma
theory was accurate,
what it would mean is that
we would have to throw away
general relativity completely.
And we would certainly
have to start
thinking more about this
specific phase of matter
and why it's so fundamental
about the universe compared
to the other states.
>> Science is not separate
from the arts and our culture.
It is a part of it.
And therefore to form
a real cosmology,
it must include everything.
And that means all of us.
We must understand
ourselves before we
can understand the universe.
And at present, we've
got it all backwards.
So the future of both
mankind and to return science
to its origins, that is the
classical approach where
all subjects were opened for
discussion for all people
is the way ahead.
>> So what does the acceptance
of the plasma universe idea
mean for the future of humanity?
I think the answer to
that comes from the fact
that if plasma is a conduit
that allows intelligences
from a deeper level of
existence to coexist with us,
then communication should be
our priority, because it will
move us forward in technology.
It will move us forward
in our understanding
of our place in the cosmos.
It will lead us forward in the
development of our own bodily
systems in medicine.
And it could even help us
eventually get off this planet
and perhaps even become
intelligent beings
without bodies ourselves.
>> When science can really come
to accept this plasma universe
theory and work with
it, well, number one,
I think that we're going to
really shift our paradigm
to realizing that we are not
this isolated little planet
in this isolated
little solar system.
We are going to
recognize that we
are part of a universal
web, a universal organism,
that we are connected to.
We're just a cell in the
body of that universe.
And yet through
the plasma fields,
we are connected to the whole.
And we're a part of it.
And so we can start to
coordinate and reach
much further than what we're
currently reaching in terms
of our energy production, in
terms of our communication,
in terms of our space travel.
When we can learn to surf
those waves of the plasma
field and that network,
we have huge possibilities
that start opening up to us
and in so many ways with space
travel, with energy
generation for our planet,
and with communication to
distant galaxies, and so forth.
So it's a big paradigm shifter.
>> Is it possible that some of
the light phenomena people see
in the skies are conscious
life forms manifesting through
the medium of plasma?
If so, might they be
expressing their sentience
through electromagnetic
fields that transition
between the different phases
of matter in ways we do
not yet understand?
Perhaps like sea
creatures moving
through the ocean of
space, they use plasma
as a way to communicate
with us in our own density.
If the concepts promoted
by plasma universe theory
do indeed paint a different
picture of our existence,
perhaps this reimagining will
help springboard humanity
into the next phase of our
evolution and, quite possibly,
facilitate contact
with intelligences
throughout the cosmos.
On the next episode
of "Deep Space,"
we'll investigate the
phenomenon of portals.
[THEME MUSIC PLAYIING]